we call them prime numbers but are those
values Universal I think you meet an
alien species they come to Earth they
don't know the language they're what
what do you mean by this word Prime you
start tapping out like two Taps three
Taps five Taps you do that they'll be
like I got you I got you I got you
they're tapping out the glip sorion
sequence wow exactly exactly in every
other field there's a little bit of
doubt and the thing that really
separates math out from the other things
is that there is no more doubt it's it's
a it's a truly rigorous proof
this is Star Talk Neil degrass Tyson
you're a personal astrophysicist got
Chuck nice with me Chuck how you doing
man oh man I'm feeling great Neil
professional comedian and my co-host
that's correct in that
order sometimes sometimes in that order
so Chuck I think this we're gonna parts
of this is going to be a cosmic queries
yes but we have a lot to cover so it's
not going to be a full up Cosmic queries
it's going to be
let's slip in what we can because the
subject is math what the language of the
universe learn math kid it's the
language of the universe Lang you want
to talk to the universe you learn math
learn math and there's one of the
funnest experts out there okay on this
very subject and his name is Grant
Sanderson Grant welcome to Star talk
it's lovely to be here thanks for having
me yeah you you you you studied math in
college and you came out and you worked
for
for uh the Con Academy oh my gosh if
you've never seen Academy I know if
you've never like logged into KH Academy
you go there and you can learn
everything about everything Y and they
care about how you learn they don't just
slap you with a textbook and it's a
completely different experience it's I
would call it even joyous learning about
practically every subject there is to
learn
and if you fail to learn you can look
over your head while clinching your fist
and
going it's a real opportunity St Trek
reference there for those who are not
geek enough to catch it right so so
Grant you have multiple math platforms
like you have a podcast uh blog YouTube
you have brilliant postings that
millions of views and this is not
trivial math that you're doing it's like
real when I say real I mean it's the
kind of math that most people would walk
by and say I don't need to know that I
don't want to know it it's got nothing
to do with me yet you somehow turn the
tables on that now before I ask you my
first question Chuck wants to ask ask
you his first question yeah and here's
my first question uh Grant um and it it
may sound a bit glip but it's not I'm
very serious what the hell is math okay
what the hell is ma Ser because what the
hell is math what the hell what the hell
is math okay here's why I ask just so
that you'll get a bit more context okay
one we started off by saying hey it's
the language of the universe you hear
that all the time but when I think of it
I'm like all right so we have these
symbols and we've attached values to
these symbols and then these values have
Concepts that are surrounding the values
and the symbols if I came from another
Galaxy I I wouldn't know your freaking
math so how is it the universe universal
language well okay so it reminds me a
little I this question came to me in um
another form I was at this wedding
recently and a person I was just meeting
there who knew I did online math stuff
said very sincerely like why is geometry
math which is a different question from
what you're asking but it sort of gets
into this like what do we even mean by
math and I there was I initially
answered saying it's something that we
can know very precisely so one of the
oldest texts in math is ukids elements
and one of the things he did there is he
starts by laying out some axioms saying
assume these things are true assume that
lines are a thing assume that points are
a thing assume that if you have a point
that's not on the line it's possible to
draw a line that's parallel to it these
sorts of things and with with just five
of these assumptions then proves
rigorously proves things that have to be
true Beyond any doubt so in every other
field there's a little bit of doubt in
every other field you've got this little
thing in the back of of your mind that
asks about experimental error um asks
you maybe I didn't observe what there
should be and the thing that really
separates math out from the other things
is that assuming you agree on the axioms
everything else there is no more doubt
it's it's a it's a truly rigorous proof
aliens might use different symbols But
ultimately we're thinking math is out
there to be uh grabbed by Whoever has
the capacity for logical thought but it
raises this question like what are the
axioms like where do you start I mean
here you can have all sorts of different
maths like once you're in an an
undergrad math major um you take all of
these courses like group Theory or
topology or whatnot and they always
start by saying here's here's some
definitions I'm like here's the
definition of a group and yada yada it's
a set with some added stuff it looks
like gobleg and then you proceed forward
and prove stuff but I think a very
reasonable question that the students
could always have is like why is this
the object we're starting with we we
could construct all sorts of other
objects and move forward and so there is
this inter play with how it relates to
the world and whether the math that
you're developing is useful or not
because I think if you if you take like
a purely logical standpoint you can
develop a whole bunch of useless math
and in fact may you know you could ask
if some of the math being developed now
like maybe will never be useful um but
his history has this strange trajectory
of things that seeming seem to be
useless coming back and being useful but
it's it's a real deep question why
there's some mathematicians who do math
only because they're pretty sure it will
never be useful well yeah I mean there
was this this rather famous
mathematician Hardy Who Um this was
around the time of World War II he was
writing this U book called a
mathematician lament or sorry a
mathematicians apology cah Hardy was one
of the teachers of ramanan if I remember
cor he was yeah he was the one who um
who answered ramanujan's letter and like
brought him in great
mathematician played by uh who's the
actor in the film Jeremy Irons I think
Jeremy Irons in fact uh those
who who love our archives can dig up our
Jeremy Irons interview oh where we talk
about that film where he played party of
the mathematician and uh to get his
Reflections on on on what that whole
story meant to him so I'm sorry pluging
our AR one of my favorite actors
combined with one of my favorite people
in history so it's like oh it's just
such bait for me I can't believe I
haven't listened to that but I mean
Hardy wrote some he was sort of
delighting in the fact that math will
never be certain kinds of math and he
was highlighting you know the theory of
prime numbers and relativity will never
be used as instruments of war um which
is is this irony looking back because um
you know prime numbers have a lot to do
with cryptography relativity has
everything to do with you know GPS and
and everything with that that
idiot it didn't but the fact that he
delighted in it is is a little strange
right and it's it's something you would
only expect from an academic maybe but
it's like even when even when they're
trying not to make it useful right even
one of them is trying not to it seems to
kind of come back and so to your to your
question Chuck on you know what what is
math if if if we just said it's the
things that we can know for sure that
doesn't really feel satisfying because
that somehow doesn't tie into this this
bizarre fact where it also describes the
world I would add that in the film
contact not in the book but in the film
the aliens first communicated with us
using pulses yeah that
out prime numbers there a lot of special
sequences that's probably the simplest
of the special sequences that was
another use of prime numbers if we don't
know anything about prime numbers that's
what going to say let let's say for
instance um we call them prime numbers
but uh are those values Universal so the
I think you meet an alien species they
come to Earth um you say like do you
know about prime numbers they don't know
the language they're what do you mean by
this word Prime you start tapping out
like two Taps three Taps five Taps you
do that the species has done like any
thinking at all they'll be like I got
you I got you I got you it's such a
natural sequence it's it's like as soon
as you have counting numbers and then
you start to ask curious questions any
intelligent entity is going to stumble
on like primes being a thing just to be
clear all this assumed that they count
in base 10 okay no it doesn't it doesn't
at all yes it does no no no not if
you're just tap twice
number how you write down the number
yeah you call it down the number you got
it okay so we would write one three
maybe they have a different base 10 but
if you just do 13 Taps and then you do
17 Taps right and you keep doing all the
prime like any you know any AI any alien
all all of them are going to be in
agreement that like this one's important
they're tapping out the glip sorion
sequence wow exactly exactly yeah trck
know your prime numbers just in for this
just an run into an alien
right so I I I hate to ask you this
question only because I don't like the
question but why not ask you uh is I'll
tell you why I don't like it in a minute
but uh is math invented or
discovered well it's okay and forgive me
for asking that question no no it's it's
it's a super common question let's let's
let's do an example rather than like
philosophizing okay so one of the first
substantive theorems that students learn
in school is the Pythagorean theorem so
at some point whether or not we've
forgotten since then many of us will
have come across that if you have a
right triangle and you label the two
shorter sides A and B and then the
longer side C no matter what right
triangle you have a squ plus b square
equals c s s it's a cool fact um it's
it's not obvious that it should be true
it's useful it lets you make sorts of
measurements and it's the first one you
meet that it doesn't just like fall out
of definitions it's it's interesting and
it's it's all that now if you ask like
is that fact invented or discovered
initially it feels like well it's
discovered for sure you go out into the
world you see right triangles you kind
of you you can measure them it's waiting
there for you to see it and notice it's
waiting for you to see it but then you
get a little further in math and then
you start to ask questions like what is
space what is you know three-dimensional
space two-dimensional space and things
like this and then one of the ways that
mathematically you're defining
two-dimensional space is rather than
saying oh it's this pre-existing thing
and we can put a coordinate system on it
a lot of math will start from the
coordinates themselves and saying it's
all pairs of real numbers so rather than
saying like oh there's this plane out
inexistence and then you put some like
axes and you say this is your x
coordinate this is your y-coordinate to
get to a point on Space you say rather
than all the tricky philosophical
questions about what is a plane and
whatnot we just say a plane is all pairs
of real numbers that's what it is and
then you can do math forward you can
like make proofs and whatnot but then
when you say what's the distance between
two points and you have to assign a what
they call a metric to the space a way of
telling distances you sort of make the
Pythagorean true theorem True by writ
you just you you define a metric that
makes it true and there's choices for
other metrics that you could have put on
it and then it starts to become kind of
sticky like wait a minute is this was
this discovered anymore or if this is
how we're doing all of our math where we
say you know a plane is just pairs of
numbers and that's mathematically what
it is then then you don't have that same
like oh it was waiting there to be
discovered wait so Grant how different
is what you described from knowing that
there's a variety of space where
Pythagorean theorem appli as we learned
it but if you curve the
space then triangles are different right
the a triangle the angles sum to more
than 180 degrees where a traditional
triangle especially a right triangle it
all comes to exactly 180 so this would
be a different metric for the
space yeah I mean so the idea that you
can put different metrics on is sort of
the the superpower of being the
mathematician right you're not
constrained so and and non- ukian
geometry was discovered before it was
well I say before it was used in physics
but if you're doing things on a sphere
that's fine but before all of the
relativity stuff that really made it
come to of course right but but this
back and forth where you can have
something that at one moment feels
discovered and like this just kind of a
inspiring truth and at another moment
feels like it was just baked into the
definitions this is a very longwinded
way of answering the simple question
that you asked as math invented or
discovered for like how I like to think
about it it is both but more
specifically I think you you go out and
you discover stuff based on your
existing either your world or your
existing math you use those discoveries
to inform the definitions of the next
step and then you make more discoveries
in that next step and then you use those
discoveries to inform the definitions
further on so basically what you're
saying is math is discovered the Way
Columbus discovered
America that's
basically what if we Define it as the
West Indies
we Define it this
way in a world where online scams and
fraud are escalating with losses
reaching a staggering $1 trillion
annually Bit Defender stands at the
Forefront of cyber security innovation
according to the Bit Defender 2024 cyber
security assessment text message scams
are now the most common threat affecting
nearly half of all users as a foundation
member of the Global anti-cam Alliance
bit Defender is deepening its fight
against fraud with cuttingedge tools and
Technologies their latest breakthrough
Bit Defender sco is an AI powered
chatbot designed to spot even the most
sophisticated scams with over two
decades of unmatched performance and
protection Bit Defender is a trusted
partner for high-profile organizations
worldwide for example they provide
Ferrari with Advanced threat
intelligence to anticipate and
outmaneuver Cy threats before they
happen they process over 50 billion
queries daily and identify 400 new
threats every minute ensuring your data
and privacy are shielded from the ever
evolving cyber threat landscape for
unparalleled cyber security you can
trust Bit Defender your Shield against
online scams and fraud find out more
about Bit Defender and try out their
services like sco by visiting the link
in the video description bit defend. me/
StarTalk ta now let's get back to the
show Grant you have a a perspective on
education that I highly respect um even
if I don't agree with every bit of it I
deeply respect it and um and you you
part ways with many Educators and that
you don't necessarily prioriti I don't
want to put words in your mouth so
correct me if I misrepresent this you
don't you don't put as a priority you
should learn math because it's relevant
to your life right that that's a typical
way a math teacher would approach it
worried that if they teach math and it's
not relevant to people's like they will
just ignore it get bored go to sleep so
I have two questions for you one we
probably agree that math more than any
other subject is what people say is
their hardest
subject so how do get around that if not
by making it relevant to people's
lives so first of all um I think anytime
there's a discussion of Education we
should pair out the idea that
explanation is different from education
and the idea of like making a YouTube
video or making an explainer is a very
different task from being an educator in
a classroom eliciting something from a
student and that you're playing
different games then which is relevant
to the answer here I think because if if
relevance is on the table it's within
you know a one hour from being able to
explain why this piece of math like
actually touches someone life amazing
run with that that's the most inspiring
thing if someone can see how it's useful
to them I have all sorts of friends who
hated math um but I lived in the Bay
area for a while lots of programmers
there and they came to love math through
programming because they were into
computer science they saw that hey to do
this graphics project I guess I really
need to understand matricies you also
stud computer science as well I did
college and so yes so a lot of like
Social Circles are in those fears and
and so that's a story I've seen many
times where here's this this bit where
usefulness is what what made someone
finally like it that's great but I think
very often utility is just not on the
table for a given piece of math all that
soon you you you want to teach some high
schooler about the quadratic formula and
they say when am I ever going to use the
honest answer for that student is never
n times out of 10 never never like you
might no no not just never never ever
okay
I made a mistake once I was uh giving a
talk to Pixar and I use this as an
example like the quadratic formula
you'll never use it so we have to like
motivate in these other ways and then
afterwards all these Graphics
programmers come up they're like we use
it every day they're like it was used
approximately a trillion times to
produce the movie Coco and I'm like okay
okay fine like yes it can yeah yeah be
careful what you say to Pixar people
there's some there's some mathematically
and scientifically literate folks
working for Pixar yes um but yeah so
given for most people never they're
never going to use it then you say like
why learn it and you could say it's
simply not worth learning right you know
spend your time learning other things
but there's there's something about the
mental exercise of rigorous thinking
that is so pure in a mathematical
setting that it really flexes some
muscles that are going to be useful
elsewhere mathematician go
on okay yeah no it's self- serving but
like I think the better analogy if you
want to tell a student why should they
learn this it's like if you go to a
football player and they're in the gym
and they're doing some squats and you
say you're never going to be on the
field with like you know 400 pounds on
your shoulders that you're like lifting
in this particular way like no no no
it's building muscles um and so I think
a lot of the math that we do in school
it's it's the same motivation you're
saying no no no you're not going to use
like this particular thing in the same
way that out on the field you're not
going to be doing like a literal squat
but the muscles built doing it like
really do make you more powerful later
that also math can and I think often
should be taught as an art simply
because it's available and like if you
can get someone bought into the beauty
of it that is as inspiring if not more
so than the utility and often done right
it's more on the table than the utility
is given the constraint of say like a 20
minute online explainer or just to be
clear I've seen some ugly math in my day
put it out there I've seen some ugly
paintings too right but that that
doesn't mean we
can't so so tell me is would you count
information Theory as mathematics 100%
yeah and what makes it
so well part of it what I'm saying it's
something we can describe very exactly
oh that's as we started this
conversation prision calculation is what
you value here so you used information
Theory I've been told to help people in
worble yeah how's that even like how
does that work well first of all for
those of
who don't know not not saying that it's
me but what is information
Theory everyone else chck yeah I mean
you know for all the people out there
that are listening right now like what
what do you mean information
Theory um so I will answer that question
Chuck by by way of talking about this
project Neil referenced where back in I
think it was 2022 whenever Wordle became
incredibly viral on like the English
speaking internet this is one time when
I got sucked in just as a programming
project to say like how would you write
like a bot that plays Wordle because
it's it's so clearly something that a
bot could play but it's just a fun
programming exercise to do it and as I
was doing it I thought it was actually a
really nice motivating example to
explain information Theory to to the
general public because here you've got
this game that a lot of people like um
the first thought that I had for how to
go about it involved these ideas from
information Theory like oh this this can
help motivate so to answer your question
Chuck um often if you have a situ where
like you're playing Wordle and let's say
you want to know is is it better to play
as a first word um so the the nature of
this game you get some letters if those
letters are part of the true word that
you're like the secret word you're
trying to get they'll show up yellow if
they're there but in the wrong spot they
show up green if they're there but in
the right spot so it's this game of like
using your previous guesses to get more
information about what the true word
might be and there's that word
information and uh so the the worst the
worst starting example um
that you could use is the word kayak k a
y a k um in some very like exact sense
this is the worst starting guess yeah
I'm already seeing it right now that
that's a suck ass word for what you're
just what you're just described that
those rules you just described that is
like the worst word because it's like
what are the odds there's a y in the
word it's like not very likely what are
the odds that a k is in the word not
very likely you're not hitting that many
vowels so you have this sense that
you're not learning that much about the
word by the way the valuation of scrap
letters tracks this very much yeah
because the rare letters have higher
value okay okay go ahead I think we use
this word information in a very heris
sense where it's the idea like I learn a
lot from doing something versus I don't
learn a lot but what who made it
actually rigorous was um a very clever
guy named Claude shanon who was working
at Bell labs and this is around 1930s
1940s you know you've got all of these
games to try to send information across
a telephone line like if you're talking
to someone but sometimes it's noisy um
and so you might ask oh should we like
boost the signal should we add more line
like how can you think more
systematically about how well you can
communicate and so he he wrote this
paper um that's like the seminal paper
for what's now known as information
theory he was the first one to use the
word bit in this paper um so this was
the first time that bits as a concept
ever came up and the basic idea there
was like if you let's say there's
something where there's two ways that it
might go you flip a coin it might be
heads or it might be Tails as soon as
you see the result you've learned
something about like which path the
universe took and if there was only two
possibilities you know that he said
you've learned the the unit of
information here is one bit but let's
say there was like a hundred
possibilities and you learn a specific
one of those somehow it feels like
you've gained more information and he he
came up with a formula for quantifying
this and then he used that formula and
like relatives of it to try to describe
how much signal you can send across um
something that has a certain amount of
noise and and it made it such that there
was a there was a theoretical limit
where you could say this is this is how
much information we we could try to get
across and then clever and clever coding
schemes could try to reach that limit
now in in the context of worldle this
means that you can you can put a number
to basically how good a starting guest
is based on um does a word like the
Shannon entropy is is like a a fancy
word for it but basically on average how
much information do you expect to get
from it kayak has a terrible Shannon
entropy in this context um a word like
slate is actually very good it's got
that e it's got that A L and T are very
common letters s even if it's not going
to show up at the end it's still a very
common letter and so um I basically you
know made this video that was giving a
walkthr of using information Theory type
Concepts and trying to motivate what
those Concepts were as a as a way of
like pursuing this little hobbyist game
of writing a bot bot to play Wordle
here's one that you don't really hear
much but it's so important and that
would be the central limit theorem so
the central limit theor is actually as
important for why it's like overused and
like perceived to be more useful than it
is than it is for its utility but um
there's a lot of things in the world
that seem to be distributed according to
a certain normal curve and and here's
what I mean by that they don't seem to
be they are right what do you mean seem
to be well actually no this this is a
good fod for discussion let's take
Heights human Heights um because I think
this is a little bit in dispute so if
you go and measure a whole bunch of
people's Heights you measure my height
your height thousand other people a
million other people and you create a
plot where you know uh you bucket it
maybe by by the inch or something so
everyone who's between 5 foot n and 5
foot 10 falls in one bucket everyone
between you know 5 foot 10 51 another
bucket you do this for people in the
same demographic let's say so we'll
separate men and women well same country
um you notice that there's this shape
that kind of bulges in the middle and it
tapers out on either side and you do
this for all sorts of other statistics
and you see the same shape that seems to
bulge in the middle and taper on either
side and it's not just that you know
there's lots of shapes that could kind
of Bulge in the middle and taper on
either sides but there's a very precise
function that you can use that seems
that describes this really quite well
even in all these different situations
got this funny formula it looks like e
to the negative x^ s with some constants
thrown in but the idea is that's by
having a formula to it then you can make
exact predictions like saying hey how
many people what percentage of people do
you think would be taller than 64 or
what percentage of males would be you
know shorter than 52 and all of these
sorts of questions so the limit theorem
explains why this curve and not any
other curve like why this curve comes up
and just as importantly it explains when
when it's actually going to come up as
opposed to maybe
um false cousins of it that seem to kind
of look like it because the the way that
it'll happen is if you have a lot of
different events that you're kind of
adding together in some way so the the
the pristine platonic example uh for a
um a normal distribution would
something like this let's say you and I
stand outside and we're going to play
this game where you flip a coin and when
it's heads you take a step forward when
it's tails you take a step back so you
play you flip a coin maybe take a step
forward flip a coin take another step
and you play this game not just with
yourself but with 10,000 of your friends
so you're all flipping your own coins
each time half of you take a step
forward half of you take a step back
roughly and you flip I don't know 15
times so you're all stepping some of you
got very very lucky and took 15 steps
forward a more typical person you know
maybe they took like seven steps forward
and eight steps back but then if you
look at where everyone is that will
follow a normal distribution very very
perfectly um or really really closely um
and it's because you have this idea that
you were you took a certain kind of
random event flipping the coin and you
were adding the results many different
times and critically all of those events
were independent each coin flip didn't
influence the next one whenever you have
this a bunch of independent things that
you're adding together it's not it's not
obvious at all that that will always
tend towards the same
Universal shape and it didn't have to be
a coin flip it could have been any other
random process with its own little
internal distribution and you you always
get this idea that adding up a bunch of
random things which are all independent
from each other lands you on this this
Universal shape now the the reason I was
saying like seems to and and and
waffling a little bit there is I do
think that there's a lot of times in
statistics when people will assume
something's normal when it's actually
not or normally distrib yeah yeah like
because I assume ch normal but I I
question because you're the only one
that's
why when you say assume something that
it would follow a normal distribution
yeah especially when it comes to
longtail events yeah I got to ask you
real quick before you go forward because
when I'm thinking of this and picturing
it it almost kind of makes sense them uh
the the distribution because you're only
tooking about a coin FP a coin flip but
you said any random so let's take 10
white marbles and put them in a bag and
one black marble and put them in a bag
and these people play the exact same
game with the same number of picks
you're telling me that that same
distribution is going to be represented
the same way if it's not a
50-50 so um yeah this is good to be more
precise so let's say you you you pick
out very often you're picking the white
marble a one in 11 times you're picking
that black marble you play this game
they they they make 20 picks they're all
independent from each other you will
still see a normal distribution what
will be different the mean will be
different so everyone will have taken
many more steps forward than back so
they're definitely going to be shifted
up the road just to be clear everyone
he's a mathematician he used the word
mean he may means average okay the
average yeah yeah their average Position
will be different a mathematician in the
house the uh the standard deviation it's
not the stern distribution just like get
up you take a step I'm the mean
distribution take a step damn it you're
loser no it's actually it's a very sful
question it's a very insightful question
because it it gets that a thing that I
didn't mention which is how like okay
it's not literally the same distribution
where they're in the same point in space
but they'll be shifted up the road they
might be like spread out a little bit
more however the this curvy shape that
you draw on top of it that has a very
specific function that's e to the
negative x^2 that's not an arbitrary
function that with a couple parameters
you tweak that just tells you like where
is it Center how much is it spread out
just two different parameters um it'll
it'll still it'll still match that
that's the real surprise of it it's like
of course some things are going to
change like where's the center of course
the spread is going to change but the
surprise is like that's the only thing
somehow every everything else that's
interesting about the specific you know
ball and bag example you did that gets
washed away and by the way the
fluctuations in the cosmic microwave
background in the early Universe between
hot and cold around the average is
exactly this distribution which gives us
information of what happened way back
earlier at the Big Bang the quum
fluctuations that would have led to it
very powerful uh means of an Al average
number of prime factors you take some
giant number and you ask like how many
prime factors does it have and you
average that for a bunch of giant
numbers normally distributed it's just
it shows up in all these different so
spooky spooky how much yeah yeah it's
spooky yeah but also I think there's the
regression to the mean for things where
you have two smart people and they're
smart because of some combination of
whatever happened in their life and then
they have babies it's not likely that
the smart that their baby will be as
smart as they are because there'll be a
regression back to the mean of everybody
else where so it works its way in
biology is what I'm saying are you
trying to are you trying to uh create a
depiction where I'm the baby
here what's
happening one more thing before we go to
Q&A uh let's let's why don't we give a
shout out to fractals here tell me about
aandal bro set H love me a good man of
BR set so this this one of those this is
one of those images that really captures
the leave home without one let me just
say um in all my years of Star Talk that
was the geekiest thing ever
said what all right love me a did
mandleur am I wrong
no oh man it depends on how much detail
you want here the one version of this is
to Simply tell people go to YouTube and
search like Mand BR set deep zoom and
then simply look and gawk at the shape
and I think this is the way a lot of
people engage with it it's a really
really intricate shape that no matter
how far you zoom in there's always more
detail to be found um and and that's
that's cool in its own right what's cool
from the mathematicians perspective is
that it has a really really simple rule
that was used to describe it even though
it's producing this mind-bogglingly
complicated shape and that rule is basic
stop me again this is too boring or like
too much detail so uh the the the heavy
lift here is that you have to start by
talking about complex numbers which it's
one of those terms that like sounds more
complicated than it is because they
literally use the word complex but in
the same way that numbers we usually
think of as being on a number line
there's a really natural way of having
numbers that live in two Dimensions so
you choose a point on two- dimensional
space and there's a number associated
with and you can do things like multiply
it by itself and and add numbers to it
normal normal Mass operation normal math
normal math and so you start with some
point and you basically say all right
I'm uh I'm going to call that point c as
my like constant C and then I'm going to
play this game where I start at zero and
I'm always going to take the square of
what I have and add C so for example you
start 0 squar is zero and then you add C
and you get to C you're like great I'm
going to do that again I'm going to
square the number which is c squared so
if C was one you would have one squar
and then you add C to it so you have
like two and play this simple game where
it's almost like you're you're at a
calculator and you're just pressing the
button enter over and over and over
having done something like what happens
if I repeat this operation sometimes the
process blows up to Infinity sometimes
it seems to stay bounded and bounce
around if you color each point on the
plane based on which of those two things
happens you color it black if it doesn't
ever run to Infinity it's just kind of
bounces around a whole bunch and you
color it some other color if it goes off
to Infinity you maybe even give it a hue
based on how quickly it runs to Infinity
that simple of rules which which you can
write with like three lines in any
programming language that very simple
set of rules produces this
mind-bogglingly intricate shape and it
shows how complexity doesn't have to
emerge from complex rules it's possible
for complex phenomena to emerge from
very very simple rules and I think
that's that's that's a powerful idea and
by the way manab BR is a modern person
right when when when was he born and
died when was he born I 20th century in
my mind yeah 20th century I think of man
as like like 70s is when I I think yeah
yeah he worked at IBM I think um I mean
his first name was Ben Beno benwa Mandel
so I just found out when mandal Brock
lived born 1924 died 2010 wow yes a man
of our times there yes indeed very cool
and so as as you zoom in you see new
detail that is informed by the previous
detail you just saw but on a smaller and
small and it's that all down well that's
that's the very classic famous depiction
of a fractal yes it's it's the it's the
celebrity fractal you know this is just
the you know the A-list actor fractal
that everyone wants to call in if they
thinking of a fractal but but since it
can be defined so simply the complexity
is only what it looks like but in terms
of information theory has very little
information associated with it because I
remember because I was active in this
space briefly and people wondered can we
use fractals to represent trees in an
image from space if we're going to model
what we Forest versus land you know uh
non-arable land and then some of that
was abandoned if not all of it because
nature actually has more
detail than the fractal so the fractal
is like a the lazy way to look like make
it look like it has detail
which people do this in computer
Graphics too they they'll use fractals
and fractal ideas to give something make
it look like nature without having to
use a lot of computer to actually to to
do it okay now you have to hear my my my
mandle BR joke okay tell me your joke
okay you probably know it so just okay
what is benoir mounder brro middle name
I have heard this one so all right go
ahead benmar Mandel bro of course
okay I have not heard that of course I
have not heard that's good that's a
that's good can can I correct I'm gonna
be that guy if oh s correct me correct
me I misr it go on go on well that's a i
the version that I know that I think
holds a little better his middle initial
is B so everyone refers to him as Beno B
Mandel brro and then you're answering
those like hey what does that b stand
for well it stands for Beno B Mandel
brro oh got you so then you're
constantly feeling in the
B okay you got it that that's the F
thank you I I shortened it because my
memory didn't hold the full joke I'm uh
just going to let you know um uh as the
resident lay person here uh and a
comedian uh it's not funny okay so
uh no I'm joking joking hey Star Talk
fans I don't know if you know this but
the audio version of the podcast
actually posts a week in advance of the
video version and you can get that in
Spotify Apple podcast and most other
podcast Outlets that are out there
multiple ways to ingest all that is
Cosmic St talk so Chuck what you got
some questions from our patreon
supporters absolutely who have exclusive
access to our question flow so what what
do you have for our guest today by the
way you might be our very first
mathematician guest I'm I'm almost
embarrassed to say that I I feel a
little bit of um hesitation with the
word mathematician because I don't I'm
not a research mathematician um I often
like hold that in a certain High esteem
okay so okay so I'll re word it out of
respect for your concern to not oversell
yourself okay you might be the first
person we've had that truly loves
math okay yeah you know Brian Green is
going to be very upset with you for that
statement oh that's true okay yeah man
yeah but but he I'm going to call him a
physicist there yeah he is a physicist
so no matter what okay okay all right
let's go and by the way if you are a
patreon patron we thank you very much
yes thank you let's go to
um hello Dr Tyson Mr Sanderson Lord nice
this is Hugo Dart from Rio De Janeiro
Brazil with my six-year-old daughter
Olivia we are such huge fans of Star
Talk uh Mr Sanderson what new
possibilities does the evolution of AI
present to the visual representation of
mathematical Concepts is there a
revolution in the area taking place or
about to take place what do you know
thank you so is AI touching math is that
basically that question yeah it is in in
in some pretty interesting ways so
couple different Avenues one of them is
using AI to sus out conjectures things
that you look at a bunch of data about
something mathematical and lot of times
when um when humans come up with
conjectures which are guesses about what
might be true that they have yet to
prove they just use their instincts they
say it seems like this might be true
maybe I should try to prove it and so
there was some work with deep mind um
where they essentially had some
computers try to generate what's the
interesting math Deep Mind is is Google
correct that's Google yeah yes yeah and
so that that's one Avenue there's this
other other Avenue where math lends
itself to exactness like we'd been
describing in a way that also lends
itself to computers very well and so
this phenomena emerging really in kind
of the last decade is a notion of proof
cheing software where when you write a
theem rather than writing it in English
you write it in an actual programming
language that can check for sure if the
thing is true and so for for example I
get a lot of like both real
mathematicians and me will get emails
from people claiming to have proven some
famous unsolved problem and the normal
thing to do with the emails is just
ignore them because uh like this is not
the normal way that like a real proof
would would get surfaced but proof
checking software would mean that you
can basically say hey if this is an
actual proof write it up in the software
we'll just run the software if it checks
out then we know it's worth looking into
but this this interfaces with AI in an
interesting way where if you want to
teach an AI to do math um you can just
generate a whole bunch of proofs
automatically whatever you write it in
this special software and whenever they
it compiles whenever the software checks
out you know it's valid and then you
have these AI kind of reinforcement
learn on the ones that are
kind of like when they play chess
against themselves or play a game
against themselves to get better by
doing it trillions and trillions of
iterations you can do this with math in
a way you can't do with other fields and
so there's this thing called the
international math Olympiad which is um
I went to it this year it's great fun
every country sends six High School age
students to basically but you went to it
not as a contestant it's for high school
students I say you old you little old
for the math olymp no I was I I was
giving some lectures to the students
yeah but
uh the uh this was one of the first
years that um some companies had Bots
try to answer the questions these are
quite hard questions they they're
written proofs they're they're not just
like inter a number kind of thing um and
the the AI again Deep Mind was doing it
that they developed got a score that's
equivalent to getting a silver medal at
this um International math Olympiad and
and that's very like people didn't think
this would be possible um like because
it's it's considered like such a it
requires creative thinking it's not just
wrote mechanics um and so have seeing
this level of creativity the reason that
was possible is because they could do
this game of letting a computer play
against itself in a sense using these
sorts of proof checking softwares so
short answer to to um our friend from
Rio Deano is like yeah there's there's
lots of interesting interface with with
AI and math Corey he who says hello Dr
Tyson and Mr Sanderson sorry Chuck I
don't like you so I'm not mentioning
you I put that in there because he
didn't
mention this is Cory he from San Bruno
California we use base 10 and it still
leaves us with a lot of irrational
numbers is there a number system that
would make irrational numbers such as Pi
rational so first of all uh I used to
live in San Bruno so hello Cory oh
really and then um so one answer to this
question is no whether a number is
rational or irrational has nothing to do
with how you represent it this kind of
to our alien discussion earlier no
matter what language we're using what
base system we're using the idea of what
makes a number rational irrational it's
intrinsic to the number itself so it's
it's a property not of the of the
description but of the of the number
itself um but maybe I just slip this in
here just because you have to help me
out uh Pi which is irrational and
transcendental in base
Pi would be 10 one Z so what's
irrational about one Z the word rational
will mean you can represent as a
fraction of whole numbers so the the
counting numbers 1 2 3 4 if you can
represent something as a fraction of
those so in base Pi all of the counting
numbers which are pretty natural object
you're just counting rocks out in the
world would have these these wild
descriptions that take a whole bunch of
different we wouldn't call them digits
it'll Force everything else into a weird
weird State also it's it's not clearly
well find what it means to be base Pi
because um like what are the symbols you
use with base 10 you have 10 symbols
that you're using to represent with Base
Four you have four symbols that you're
using but base Pi like what it's not
entirely clear what a non-hole number
it's one symbol it's one symbol but it
goes on
[Laughter]
forever okay so you're right if if you
made piie a nice even looking number
everything else relative to it has to
has to die
give give of its smooth life for you to
make pie look smooth you can make it rep
yeah it's the the the thing that's
irrational you could say is the
relationship between pi and the number
one so it's kind of like whichever one
of those you make look as natural as you
can you're sort of you have to you have
to own up to the fact that the
relationship between the two has this um
this property of not for numbers yeah so
the answer is no no the answer is no
that you know basically you you're not
going to be able to make Pi rational
without making everything else you know
some kind of weird
representation can rational but go ahead
yeah I have a tendency to blather so
definitely stop me if if I go too deep
now aside from talking about bases you
can talk about how do you represent
irrational numbers where we what we're
used to do is writing them down with
decimals like Pi is
3.1415 which effectively you're saying
it's three and it's plus 1110th plus 41
100 plus one 1000th you're kind of
adding all these like powers of 100 but
there's other ways that you could try to
use numbers to represent irration like
use whole numbers counting numbers to
represent irrational values and one I
just want to throw into The Ether for
like the Curious listener to go off and
like land on the Wikipedia page if they
want um is the idea of a continued
fraction where it's another way that you
can use like a sequence of numbers of
counting numbers to describe these
irrational things I've had nightmares
about continued fractions just oh so you
know the what what can maybe turn those
nightmares into dreams is seeing how
certain values like um the golden ratio
um or E when you look at their continued
fraction rather than just having a whole
bunch of arbitrary seeming gobbledygook
as the digits you see these really
really natural sequences and so somehow
if you want a different language with it
to describe numbers like continued
fractions offers another language that
exposes the regularity in certain
irrational constants even if the fact
that they're irrational is something you
can't see now this kind of this kind of
strikes me as uh what we talked about in
the beginning of the conversation as
useless
math why gave me nightmares is you write
it but you can't write the whole thing
it's this fraction that just spills off
the page but the same is true of um of
decimal values like I can't write pi
3.1415 still not Pi 3.14159 so you're
saying if I'm okay with that I should be
okay with continued fractions I don't
know I mean they're award like the
layout because you have to use vertical
space to kind of like right right to and
it grows as you keep going yeah so I I
think we need a representation of
irrational numbers uh where the numbers
don't believe that the Earth is round
okay sure
yeah all right time for a few more
questions all right here we go this is
Alysa Feld hos from Rocket City
Huntsville and she
says is there black hole math that we
may be missing to see what the end
result is beyond the Event
Horizon so I I like that so let me let
me let me flesh that out even some more
the limits of our theories of the
universe so general relativity has has
limits that are known in advance it
cannot describe the singularity of the
black hole or the singularity of the big
bang and these are gravitational
singularities where it has been said God
divides by zero which you're not
supposed to do so is and then strength
theorists March to the rescue except
they haven't rescued anything yet
so at what point do we say grant that
we're missing
physics new physics to help us and at
what point might we
say come on guys give us another branch
of mathematics and that will save us
from our ignorance now is that a fair
retelling of this question I think it
might be I I like that retelling I'm G
I'm gonna throw out a flag that feels
like this one's a little above my pay
grade in terms of um like I know a lot
of the specific insights around um
understanding what happens at the Event
Horizon have been you know this has been
one of the most fruitful areas for
seeing relationships between quantum
mechanics in general relativity um and
the specifics of that I'm I'm not going
to pretend to have my mind fully wrapped
around to say like ah here here's here's
what the Insight will be that gets us
one step further but but maybe Neil you
you can provide a little bit of um
intuition on this where I think broadly
the idea of alternate alternate
mathematical tools to understand like
that specific part of the universe feels
like a ripe area for um for where
progress can happen where a lot of new
physics happens at the boundary of what
uh of what we can observe and have
observed and you know singularities give
something that's quite literally at this
boundary and so I think when in history
when you have had new types of math come
in to describe new physics or it can
even be old math that's describing new
physics right like when quantum
mechanics was founded and people started
using a bunch of Matrix algebra to do
this it's not like matrices hadn't
existed it's just there was a utility
for them that hadn't been known before
same deal with imaginary numbers quantum
mechanics they had existed but there was
a utility that was then found s similar
things might happen for whatever further
steps one wants to make here where there
might be some existing math out there um
that hasn't yet found a utility but but
you try to use it we get back to work so
you can help us out yeah yeah exactly
Chuck got time for just one more
question just one more all right how
about Frosty from Tennessee you don't
know how he speaks what's that you don't
know if he's got a that accent uh no I
don't but he does now I'm Frosty from
Tennessee I guess with a name like
Frosty he's got it coming y That's yeah
man Frosty's cool he's never mind anyway
uh he says uh many mathematicians speak
of the beauty in mathematics how would
you explain this beauty to someone who
might view math as purely functional or
just plain difficult
and I'd like to add to that do you have
any insights into why so many people
find math to be difficult it's almost
like all of civilization there are
people who like math and that's 1% of
everybody and then the 99% of people who
hate math was their worth subject were
they never they never did well in it and
then it was never intuitive to them as
an educator in that space taken on I
think a lot of what's happening is that
the things that we do in school are
pretty distinct from what mathematicians
find beautiful when they're referencing
that so it's not that they're both
looking at the same thing and one type
of person finds it beautiful and then
99% don't we're looking at different
things because in school often what
you're doing is implementing like a
procedure you learn the procedure for
adding two-digit numbers when you're
like in elementary school you learn the
procedure for solving for x you learn
the procedure for taking a derivative
all of these times along the thing that
people find beautiful all these
different levels where it's at the at
the elementary or or you know the
usually calculus is like the highest one
that a high school might teach all of it
it's still very procedural and that's
there's nothing wrong with that like
that's a necessary part of of doing that
that's that's where you're doing your
squats in the gym right this is building
some muscles but the the thing that is
beautiful will be unexpected connections
so seeing like hey I saw this bit of
math show up off in this corner and that
same bit of math showed up in this
completely different spot um I mean
Pi is a really good example here where
Pi shows up in all sorts of places you
wouldn't expect it to so just I can
throw down one very quick example um for
the the something that maybe anyone can
understand why it's at least surprising
even if maybe you don't see see Beauty
in it right away if I take one minus a
third you end up at somewhere on the
number line then if I add one fif you
kind of go up a little bit then if I
subtract 17th and then I add 1 nth and I
subtract 1 11th and I add 13th and I
play this game of basically adding and
subtracting in alternating fashion all
of these like one over some odd number
ever smaller and ever smaller smaller it
kind of bounces back and forth and it
seem it'll approach one particular point
on the number line that point is exactly
pi divided by four you look at that like
Pi is about circles what why on Earth
would Pi have anything to do with this
game that I'm playing it's got no
business showing up on your time got no
business on your number one there's so
the normal distribution we were talking
about earlier that describes you know
statistics all over it has a pie in it
when you describe the distribution
properly why where's the circle what
what on Earth is going on there so that
that side of it where there's a mystery
there's this it's you know it's it's the
opening chapter of a mystery novel you
see this thing you want to know like who
did it like what why did this happen um
and then and then the path to resolution
so I think the if anyone enjoys a
Sherlock Holmes story for example the
part of your brain that that's tickling
where you have this mystery at the start
some path that feels like it could be
discoverable but takes a little bit of
cleverness along the way and then it's
satisfying to see the not tied at the
end like that is the feeling um that
people are describing when it's the
beauty of math which is different from
the thing happening in most classrooms
which is the procedural side and and
understanding how to go through motions
which which are useful right but it's
just it's a different a different
category well Grant you're giving us
hope that because people do like
connections I mean there's that whole TV
series and book series who's the host of
the British guy yeah yeah James bur
right it was about Connections and of
course there was there were geopolitical
social cultural connections but
nonetheless I think we always like
knowing that this over here is the same
as that over there and when you didn't
otherwise realize that but I think I
think the the Intrigue that you're
speaking to is far more important from
an educational standpoint because the
procedure is kind of the work the nuts
and bolts whereas what you are speaking
to is the Wonder and the mystery and
these are all Concepts that show up in
life throughout life and that always
spark us to think and to ponder and to
something bigger than ourselves and if
people were able to bring that into the
classroom I think you would find a lot
more children uh being excited about
math not all educators are made the same
that's problem absolutely yeah I mean
honestly I I I'm always fascinated when
I listen to anyone talk about math from
Neil to you and you name it to Brian
Green to you know Brian Cox you know
when these the way you talk about math
makes it so much more interesting but
when I was in school I had several
teachers especially in calculus where I
would get the right answer but I got it
the wrong way and that was the end of it
they were like yeah you're wrong you
can't do it like that and I'm like okay
well instead of hey let's go on this
little journey to show you you know how
you're thinking about this I never got
that it was like no you got the wrong
answer and honestly it it only took a
little I was like clearly I don't think
right I that's what I came away from
calculus my calculus experience was I do
not think right and that was it it's
it's your problem it's all
you so Grant thank you for being a guest
on talk and once again we can find you
on all platforms with three blue one
brown as the handle and I don't think
you had to compete with anyone to get
that handle on all platforms as you have
successfully managed and you have a
podcast YouTube channel a Blog you
you're active on X and and in your
Instagram as well correct yeah there's
some short videos um up on there yeah
your YouTube is chalk full of all all
manner of videos some short some long
some courses you even give there and
they're so popular and it gives us hope
that not everyone in the world thinks of
math as the worst possible thing they
could give their brain attention too and
you are living evidence of this so so
Grant thanks for being on Star Talk
thanks for having me all right Chuck
always good ma'am Find You Chuck Nice
comic Chuck Nice comic everywhere thank
you Neil everywhere you got a comic
cic this has been Star Talk a hybridized
cosmic queries all about math Neil de
grass Tyson here as always I bid you to
keep looking up
[Music]